>> Ifill: A DEBT DEFAULT
AVERTED; THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
BACK IN BUSINESS.
BUT THE DEAL TO END THE
STALEMATE SETS THE STAGE FOR A
NEW BUDGET BATTLE IN THE COMING
MONTHS.
GOOD EVENING, I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
AFTER WEEKS OF CAPITOL HILL
ACRIMONY, WE GET PERSPECTIVE
FROM CORY BOOKER, THE NEW JERSEY
DEMOCRAT WHO'LL SOON BE THE
SENATE'S NEWEST MEMBER.
AND SYLVIA MATHEWS BURWELL.
THE WHITE HOUSE'S BUDGET
DICTORRE.
>> Ifill: PLUS, RAY SUAREZ
REPORTS ON THE DEBATE OVER SMART
GUNS, PART OF A HIGH-TECH
APPROACH TO FIREARM SAFETY.
>> YOU'LL SEE THE LIGHT TURN
GREEN-- FROM GREEN, WHICH MEANS
HE'S THE AUTHORIZED USER, TO
RED, WHICH MEANS I'M THE
UNAUTHORIZED USER, AND THE
FIREARM WILL NOT SHOOT.
>> Ifill: THOSE ARE JUST SOME OF
THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S "PBS NEWSHOUR."
>> Woodruff: OUR LEAD STORY
TONIGHT: THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
WAS BACK AT WORK TODAY.
AFTER VOTES LAST NIGHT IN THE
HOUSE AND SENATE, AND A
PRESIDENTIAL SIGNATURE, ENDED A
16-DAY SHUTDOWN.
THE DEAL ALSO RAISED THE
NATION'S DEBT CEILING, REMOVING
THE THREAT OF DEFAULT.
BUT THE SHORT-TERM AGREEMENTS
SET UP THE POSSIBILITY OF NEW
SHOWDOWNS TO COME EARLY NEXT
YEAR.
"NEWSHOUR" CONGRESSIONAL
CORRESPONDENT KWAME HOLMAN
BEGINS OUR COVERAGE.
>> WELCOME BACK, EVERYBODY!
>> Reporter: THE VICE PRESIDENT
GREETED WORKERS RETURNING TO THE
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
WITH HUGS, HANDSHAKES AND
BREAKFAST.
>> BY THE WAY, I DIDN'T BRING
ENOUGH MUFFINS.
I BROUGHT MUFFINS, SO...
>> Reporter: TENS OF THOUSANDS
OF FEDERAL EMPLOYEES WERE BACK
ON THE JOB, AFTER LAST NIGHT'S
AGREEMENT.
ELSEWHERE: OTHER SIGNS OF THINGS
RETURNING TO NORMAL.
IN THE NATION'S CAPITAL, POPULAR
TOURIST SITES REOPENED.
THE NATIONAL ZOO'S BELOVED
PANDACAM CAME BACK ONLINE,
ALTHOUGH THE ZOO REMAINED CLOSED
UNTIL TOMORROW.
THE SENATE'S OHIO CLOCK RESUMED
TICKING, ITS TIME-KEEPER NO
LONGER FURLOUGHED.
AND NATIONAL PARK SITES ACROSS
THE COUNTRY, FROM THE GREAT
SMOKY MOUNTAINS TO ALCATRAZ
ISLAND, WELCOMED BACK VISITORS.
BUT AT THE WHITE HOUSE,
PRESIDENT OBAMA SAID DESPITE THE
LATE-NIGHT CONGRESSIONAL ACTION,
AMERICANS WERE COMPLETELY FED UP
WITH DYSFUNCTION IN WASHINGTON.
HE CALLED ON LAWMAKERS TO PUT
ASIDE PARTISAN DIFFERENCES AND
WORK TOGETHER FOR THE GOOD OF
THE COUNTRY.
>> NOW THAT THE GOVERNMENT IS
RE-OPENED AND THIS THREAT TO OUR
ECONOMY IS REMOVED, ALL OF US
NEED TO STOP FOCUSING ON THE
LOBBYISTS AND THE BLOGGERS AND
THE TALKING HEADS ON RADIO AND
THE PROFESSIONAL ACTIVISTS WHO
PROFIT FROM CONFLICT AND FOCUS
ON WHAT THE MAJORITY OF
AMERICANS SENT US HERE TO DO.
>> Reporter: THE PRESIDENT
OUTLINED THREE PRIORITIES FOR
THE REMAINDER OF THE YEAR--
PASSING IMMIGRATION REFORM AND A
FARM BILL, PLUS REACHING A LONG-
TERM BUDGET DEAL.
THAT PROCESS GOT UNDERWAY THIS
MORNING, WITH THE FOUR TOP
BUDGET WRITERS IN CONGRESS
MEETING FOR BREAKFAST.
AFTERWARD, NEITHER SIDE OFFERED
ANY GUARANTEES.
REPUBLICAN PAUL RYAN CHAIRS THE
HOUSE BUDGET COMMITTEE:
>> I WANT TO HAVE A BUDGET
AGREEMENT THAT GETS THIS DEBT
AND DEFICIT UNDER CONTROL, THAT
DOES RIGHT BY FUTURE GENERATIONS
AND HELPS US GROW THE ECONOMY.
AND WE'RE GOING TO TRY AND
FIGURE OUT IF WE CAN FIND AN
AGREEMENT TO DO THAT.
>> Reporter: DEMOCRAT PATTY
MURRAY HEADS THE SENATE BUDGET
PANEL.
>> CHAIRMAN RYAN KNOWS I'M NOT
GOING TO VOTE FOR HIS BUDGET.
I KNOW THAT HE'S NOT GOING TO
VOTE FOR MINE.
WE'RE GOING TO FIND THE TWO
COMMON-- THE COMMON GROUND
BETWEEN OUR TWO BUDGETS THAT WE
BOTH CAN VOTE ON.
AND THAT'S OUR GOAL.
>> Reporter: THE BUDGET GROUP
WAS FORMED AS PART OF THE PLAN
APPROVED BY CONGRESS YESTERDAY
THAT FUNDS THE GOVERNMENT FOR
JUST THREE MONTHS UNTIL MID-
JANUARY; AND INCREASES THE DEBT
LIMIT THROUGH FEBRUARY 7.
THE DEAL PASSED THE SENATE WITH
OVERWHELMING BIPARTISAN SUPPORT.
BUT ONLY ABOUT A THIRD OF HOUSE
REPUBLICANS VOTED FOR THE
PROPOSAL.
MANY OF THOSE VOTING NO SAID THE
DEAL FAILED TO REIN IN THE
PRESIDENT'S HEALTH CARE LAW.
WHILE THE CLOUD OF UNCERTAINTY
HANGING THE CAPITOL TEMPORARILY
HAD BEEN LIFTED CONCERN LINGERED
ABOUT THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES
RESULTING FROM THE LATEST
POLITICAL STANDOFF.
STANDARD & POOR'S ESTIMATED THE
SHUTDOWN TRIMMED $24 BILLION
FROM THE NATION'S ECONOMIC
ACTIVITY.
THE PRESIDENT SAID THE CRISIS
NOT ONLY HAD CAUSED FINANCIAL
PAIN, BUT HURT AMERICA'S
REPUTATION AS A GLOBAL LEADER.
>> NOTHING HAS DONE MORE DAMAGE
TO AMERICA'S CREDIBILITY IN THE
WORLD, OUR STANDING WITH OTHER
COUNTRIES, THAN THE SPECTACLE
THAT WE'VE SEEN THESE PAST
SEVERAL WEEKS.
IT'S ENCOURAGED OUR ENEMIES.
IT'S EMBOLDENED OUR COMPETITORS.
AND IT'S DEPRESSED OUR FRIENDS
WHO LOOK TO US FOR STEADY
LEADERSHIP.
>> Reporter: A LONG-TERM BUDGET
RESOLUTION IS NOT EXPECTED COME
SOON, MOST LAWMAKERS LEFT
WASHINGTON LAST NIGHT FOLLOWING
THE VOTE.
>> Woodruff: WE'LL HAVE MORE ON
THE FALLOUT FROM ALL THIS, LATER
IN THE PROGRAM.
IN OTHER NEWS, STOCKS STAGED AN
IMPRESSIVE RECOVERY ON WALL
STREET TODAY AFTER THE LAST-
MINUTE DEAL TO AVOID A U.S.
DEFAULT.
THE S&P 500 CLOSED WITH A RECORD
HIGH.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
ERASED ITS EARLY LOSSES AND
ENDED THE DAY DOWN JUST 2 POINTS
TO CLOSE ABOVE 15,371.
THE NASDAQ ROSE 23 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 3,863.
THERE ARE NEW REVELATIONS THE
C.I.A. IS COLLABORATING
EXTENSIVELY WITH THE NATIONAL
SECURITY AGENCY TO CARRY OUT
DRONE STRIKES AGAINST TARGETS
ABROAD.
THAT'S ACCORDING TO DOCUMENTS
"THE WASHINGTON POST" RECEIVED
FROM N.S.A. LEAKER, EDWARD
SNOWDEN.
THEY SHOWED THE C.I.A. RELIES
HEAVILY ON THE N.S.A.'S ABILITY
TO GATHER VAST QUANTITIES OF E-
MAIL, PHONE CALLS, AND OTHER
DATA TO TRACK DOWN TERRORISTS.
PRESIDENT OBAMA PLANS TO
NOMINATE JEH JOHNSON TO LEAD THE
DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY.
AN UNNAMED WHITE HOUSE OFFICIAL
SAID THE PRESIDENT WILL MAKE THE
ANNOUNCEMENT TOMORROW.
IF CONFIRMED, THE FORMER
PENTAGOLAWYN ER WILL SUCCEED
JANET NAPOLITANO WHO STEPPED
DOWN IN AUGUST.
INTERNATIONAL RESEARCHERS NOW
SAY AIR POLLUTION IS A MORE
SERIOUS CAUSE OF CANCER THAN
PASSIVE CIGARETTE SMOKE.
THE CANCER AGENCY OF THE WORLD
HEALTH ORGANIZATION MADE THAT
DECLARATION TODAY.
IT'S THE FIRST TIME IT HAS
CLASSIFIED AIR POLLUTION IN ITS
ENTIRETY AS CAUSING CANCER, EVEN
THOUGH THE RISK TO INDIVIDUALS
IS LOW.
NEW JERSEY ELECTED NEWARK MAYOR
CORY BOOKER TO BE THE STATE'S
NEXT U.S. SENATOR.
IN THE SPECIAL ELECTION, THE 44-
YEAR-OLD DEMOCRAT WON 55% OF THE
VOTE  REPTOUBLICAN STEVE
LONEGAN'S 44%.
BOOKER WILL FINISH OUT THE TERM
OF SENATOR FRANK LAUTENBERG, WHO
DIED IN OFFICE IN JUNE.
HE SPOKE LAST NIGHT TO CROWDS OF
HIS SUPPORTERS IN NEWARK.
>> TOO MANY PEOPLE ARE
FORGETTING THAT THE LINES THAT
DIVIDE US ARE NOTHING COMPARE TO
THOSE TIES THAT BIND US.
IT FORGETS, THIS CYNICAL
ATTITUDE FORGETS THE IDEA THAT
IDEAL, THE TRUTH THAT WE ARE ALL
IN THIS TOGETHER.
>> Woodruff: WE'LL TALK WITH
SENATOR-ELECT BOOKER RIGHT AFTER
THE NEWS SUMMARY.
MORE THAN 60 PEOPLE WERE KILLED
IN A FRESH WAVE OF VIOLENCE
ACROSS IRAQ TODAY.
MOST OF THE CAR AND SUICIDE
BOMBINGS TARGETED SHI-ITE
DISTRICTS OF BAGHDAD.
NINE CAR BOMBS DETONATED IN THE
CAPITAL, INCLUDING ONE NEAR A
PLAYGROUND THAT KILLED TWO
CHILDREN.
THE EXPLOSIONS RANG OUT AS
IRAQIS CELEBRATED THE MUSLIM
HOLIDAY OF EID AL-ADHA.
THE ANNUAL HAJJ PILGRIMAGE IN
SAUDI ARABIA CAME TO AN END
TODAY.
NEARLY TWO MILLION MUSLIM
PILGRIMS TOOK PART IN THE FINAL
DAY OF COMMEMORATIONS IN THE
HOLY CITY OF MECCA.
THEY PERFORMED THEIR LAST ROUND
OF RITUALS BEFORE LEAVING THE
GRAND MOSQUE-- ISLAM'S MOST
IMPORTANT HOLY SITE.
IN AUSTRALIA, UNSEASONABLY HOT
TEMPERATURES COMBINED WITH
STRONG WINDS TO FAN THE FLAMES
OF NEARLY 100 WILDFIRES.
AND 18 OF THE FIRES IN NEW SOUTH
WALES-- THE MOST POPULOUS STATE
IN THE COUNTRY-- WERE BURNING
OUT OF CONTROL.
SMOKE PLUMES STRETCHED FOR
MILES, AND EVEN CAST AN ORANGE
HAZE OVER DOWNTOWN SYDNEY.
CONDITIONS ARE STILL TOO INTENSE
TO GET AN ACCURATE NUMBER OF HOW
MANY HOMES HAVE BEEN DESTROYED.
>> WE ARE UNCLEAR YET AS TO HOW
MANY PROPERTIES HAVE BEEN LOST,
BUT IT'S SUSPECTED THAT BY THE
TIME WE FINISH COUNTING, IT WILL
AT LEAST BE IN THE HUNDREDS.
THE FACT IS THAT TODAY'S
CONDITIONS, BOTH THE HOT, DRY
CONDITIONS BUT ALSO THE WIND
CONDITIONS-- HAVE CONTRIBUTED TO
THE DIFFICULTIES FACED BY
FIREFIGHTERS AND COMMUNITIES ON
THE GROUND.
>> Woodruff: NEARLY 1,500
FIREFIGHTERS ARE BATTLING THE
FIRES, WHICH AUTHORITIES SAY ARE
THE MOST SERIOUS IN A DECADE.
THE SOCIAL NETWORK FACEBOOK HAS
EASED ITS PRIVACY RULES FOR
TEENAGERS.
FACEBOOK USERS BETWEEN THE AGES
OF 13 AND 17 WILL NOW BE ABLE TO
SHARE THEIR INFORMATION AND
PHOTOS PUBLICLY, INSTEAD OF WITH
ONLY THEIR FRIENDS NETWORK.
FACEBOOK SAID IT MADE THE CHANGE
TO ALLOW TEENS TO HAVE A MORE
POWERFUL VOICE WHEN IT CAME TO
POSITIONS OR CAUSES THEY
SUPPORT.
WE'LL HAVE MORE ON THIS STORY
LATER IN THE PROGRAM.
STILL AHEAD ON THE "NEWSHOUR":
THE SENATE'S NEWEST MEMBER; THE
ECONOMIC IMPACT OF THE SHUTDOWN
AND DEBT FIGHT; A HIGH-TECH
APPROACH TO GUN SAFETY; WHAT
TEENS SHARE ONLINE AND THE
HISTORY AND PHILOSOPHIES BEHIND
THE STALEMATE IN WASHINGTON.
>> Ifill: NOW, FOR MORE ON NEW
JERSEY'S NEW SENATOR-ELECT.
WHEN HE IS SWORN IN, PROBABLY
LATER THIS MONTH, CORY BOOKER
WILL BE ONLY THE FOURTH AFRICAN
AMERICAN ELECTED TO THE U.S.
SENATE.
BUT HE BRINGS HIS OWN  CELEBRITY
WITH HIM, INCLUDING AS THE
SUBJECT OF AN OSCAR-NOMINATED
DOCUMENTARY IN 2005: "STREET
FIGHT".
I SPOKE WITH HIM A SHORT TIME
AGO.
MAYOR BOOKER, CONGRATULATIONS ON
YOUR ELECTION LAST NIGHT.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
I'M GRATEFUL AND GRATEFUL TO
HAVE A CHANCE TO BE ON WITH YOU.
>> Ifill: YOU KNOW, YOU'RE A
BIG GUY ON TWITTER.
EVERYBODY KNOWS YOU DO A LOT OF
COMMUNICATING WITH PEOPLE THAT
WAY, AND ONE OF THE QUESTIONS I
POSED YESTERDAY TO YOU ON TWIT
SER WHY DOES HE WANT TO COME TO
WASHINGTON IN THE MIDDLE OF ALL
THIS?
>> YOU HAVE A LOT OF PEOPLE IN
MY WORLD EXCITED THAT YOU
TWEETED AT ME.
LOOK, I'VE BEEN A MAYOR WHO HAS
BEEN TRYING TO PUSH A CITY
FORWARD WAY LOT OF GREAT PEOPLE
FROM ALL SIDES OF THE AISLE, AND
WE JUST FACED A LOT OF HEADWINDS
BECAUSE SOME OF THE THINGS THAT
OFTEN SEEM VERY OBVIOUS THAT
WASHINGTON ISN'T DOING TO HELP
OUT.
SO TAKE, FOR EXAMPLE, GUN
VIOLENCE IN MY CITY.
THE MAJORITY OF GUNS THAT WE
RECOVER DON'T EVEN COME FROM NEW
JERSEY.
THEY COME FROM CRIMINAL GUN
RUNNERS WHO ARE NOT LAW-ABIDING
CITIZENS, WHO SHOULD HAVE A
SECOND AMENDMENT RIGHT.
THEY COME FROM CRIMINALS WHO CAN
WALK INTO SECONDARY MARKETS AND
BUY WEAPONS AND HAVING
COMMONSENSE BACKGROUND CHECKS
THAT 90% OF AMERICANS AGREE ON
MAKE SENSE BUT WE'RE NOT GETTING
IT DONE.
SO ON A NUMBER OF FROOSHZ KIDS
THAT GO THROUGH MY COLLEGES AND
GET DEGREES AND THINGS THAT CAN
BARELY SPELL.
BUT AS SOON AS WE EDUCATE THEM
AND USE OUR TAXPAYER DOLLARS TO
DO THAT, AND THEY GRADUATE,
THEY'RE READY TO START BUSINESSS
AND TO ADD TO OUR ECONOMY WE
TELL THEM THEY CAN'T STAY HERE
AND END UP PUSHING THEM OUT OF
OUR COUNTRY BECAUSE THEY CAN'T
GET A VISA.
I CAN GO THROUGH DOZENS DOZENS
OF ISSUES THAT WOULD MAKE NEW
JERSEY STRONGER, MORE
ECONOMICALLY COMPETITIVE AND
SAFER BUT WE'RE NOT GETTING IT
DONE IN WASHINGTON RIGHT NOW SO
I WANT TO BE A PART OF WHAT I
HOPE WILL BE PEOPLE COMING TO
THE GET WORK DONE FOR THE PEOPLE
OF NEW JERSEY AND THE NATION.
>> Ifill: YOU JUST NAMED TWO
ISSUES, GUN CONTROL AND
IMMIGRATION, WHICH DON'T SEEMED
TO BE GOING ANYWHERE, EVEN IN
THE DEMOCRATICALLY CONTROLLED
SENATE.
WHY DO YOU THINK YOUR PRESENCE
THERE WILL CHANGE THAT?
>> WELL, LOOK, I'M-- I THINK YOU
AND I BOTH KNOW THAT ONE
SENATOR, ESPECIALLY NOW THE
100th IN SENIORITY, WON'T
NECESSARILY WALK DOWN THERE AND
EVERYBODY WILL BE SPITTING
SUNSHINE AND RAINBOWS.
I'M VERY KNOWLEDGEABLE OF THE
CHALLENGES BEFORE ME.
AND I ALSO GO THERE WITH THE
RIGHT ATTITUDE.
I'VE GOT A REALLY-- I WORK HARD
AND HUMBLY AND WORK AS HARD AS I
CAN AND FIND CREATIVE WAYS TO
JOIN WITH OTHERS TO MAKE A
DIFFERENCE.
I PROMISED THE PEOPLE IN SCOURGE
OF NEW JERSEY I WAS GOING TO
WORK DISMARD FIND CREATIVE WAYS
TO MOVE THE BALL FORWARD AND
THAT'S WHAT I INTEND TO DO.
I KNOW WE CAN DO BETTER.
I KNOW AMERICA CAN.
AND I KNOW THIS CURRENT STATE OF
SORT OF BRINKSMANSHIP,
ZERO-SUM-GAME POLITICS IS NOTE
WORK FOR EITHER PARTY.
IT'S NOT WORKING FOR AMERICA,
AND I HOPE I CAN JOIN WITH OTHER
PEOPLE WHO WANT TO GO A
DIFFERENT WAY.
I'M CONFIDENT THAT AMERICAN
HISTORY IS A TESTIMONY TO THE
ACHIEVEMENT OF THE IMPOSSIBLE,
AND IN NEWARK, I COME FROM THE
HARD CITY WHERE PEOPLE SAID WE
COULDN'T MAKE A DIFFERENCE,
COULDN'T MAKE A CHANGE, COULDN'T
REVERSE TRENDS LIKE OUR
POPULATION DECLINING, OUR CITY
TAX BASE DECLINING, BUT WE'VE
REVERSED THOSE TRENDS NOW.
WE'VE DONE WHAT OTHERS SAID
COULDN'T BE DONE AND I'M READY
TO TAKE THAT TO ANOTHER LEVEL.
>> Ifill: THERE ARE A COUPLE
OF DIFFERENT EXAMPLES OF WHAT A
NEW SENATOR IN WASHINGTON COULD
DO, THAT YOU CAN FOLLOW,
ESPECIALLY SENATORS WITH
REPUTATIONS THAT PRECEDE THERNLG
LIKE YOURS.
HILLARY CLINTON CAME TO
WASHINGTON, HE KEPT HER HEAD
LOW.
TED CRUZ CAME TO WASHINGTON AND
OBVIOUSLY DIDN'T KEEP HIS HEAD
LOW.
WHICH EXAMPLE WOULD YOU TRY TO
FOLLOW?
>> NEITHER.
I WANT TO BE MYSELF.
I WANT TO BE AS AUTHENTIC AS
POSSIBLE AND THAT MEANS DOING
LIKE HILLARY CLINTON, HAVING A
HUMBLE HEART, AND FOCUSING ON
GETTING WORK DONE, BUT ALSO
MAKING SURE I'M STAYING TRUE TO
MYSELF IN THE WAY THEY FOUND THE
BEST WAY TO GET THINGS DONE, AND
SO IN NEWARK, WE WERE EVERYWHERE
TACTICAL.
YOU KNOW, MY FIRST YEAR IN
OFFICE, I THINK I SPENT MOST
NIGHTS IN A POLICE CAR 2:00,
THREE:00 4:00 IN THE MORNING,
WORKING ON CRIME ISSUES, UP IN
THE MORNING, GREETING PEOPLE AT
SCHOOLS, TRYING TO GIVE HEART TO
PEOPLE IN OUR CITY.
BUT AT THE SAME TIME, SOMETIMES
WE FOUND IT NECESSARY TO ELEVATE
NEWARK'S PROFILE, TO BRING
ATTENTION TO OUR CITY, SO WE CAN
DRAW INVESTMENT.
I DON'T KNOW WHAT THE STRATEGY
WILL BE IN WASHINGTON.
THE REALITY IS, I'VE GOT TO GO
DOWN THERE AS MY MENTOR, PEOPLE
LIKE BILL BRADLEY, HAVE TOLD ME
TO DO.
GET TO KNOW YOUR COLLEAGUES ON
BOTH SIDES OF THE AISLE,
RECOGNIZE THAT THEY, TOO, BEAT
WITH THE SAME HEART, AND THE
SAME TYPE OF BLOOD.
AND LEARN PROCEDURE OF THE PLACE
BECAUSE IT DOES HAVE ITS OWN
RULES.
AND THEN BECOME A MASTER OF A
NUMBER OF ISSUES THAT YOU CAN
REALLY MAKE YOUR OWN AND DRIVE
THE BALL FORWARD.
AND IN EVERY WAY POSSIBLE BE A
SCRAPER, TRY TO FIND WAYS TO
SCORE POINT, HIT SINGLES AND
DOUBLES FOR THE PEOPLE YOU SWORE
AN OATH TO REPRESENT.
>> Ifill: LAST NIGHT DURING
YOUR ACCEPTANCE SPEECH, I SAID
DEMOCRACY WAS NOT A SPECTATOR
SPORT.
WHAT DO YOU SAY TO PEOPLE WHO
ARE ALIENATED BY THE WHOLE
PROCESS AT THIS POINT?
>> WE CANNOT AFFORD TO SURRENDER
TO CYNICISM.
THINK OF THE FRUSTRATING TIMES
OF OUR PAST WHEN MANY PEOPLE
SHOULD HAVE THROWN UP THEIR
ARMS, WHEN CIVIL RIGHTS
LEGISLATION KEPT FAILING, WHERE
LYNCHINGS KEPT GETTING WORSE,
WHERE WOMEN WERE DID NEED AGAIN
AND AGAIN THE RIGHT TO EQUAL
SUFFRAGE.
THERE WERE SO MANY TIMES WHEN
THERE WAS JUSTIFIABLE REASONS
EVEN MORE SO THAN NOW FOR
CRITICISM.
OUR GENERATION WHO STARES THAT T
THE INCREDIBLE HISTORY OF
WORKING THROUGH FRUSTRATION, HAS
NO RIGHT TO INDULGE IN CYNICISM.
WE DON'T.
WHAT WE HAVE IS AN OBLIGATION TO
KEEP WORKING TAT, TO KEEP
FIGHTING, TO NEVER GIVE UP.
WASHINGTON HAS TO WORK FOR
AMERICA.
OUR NATION WAS FOUNDED WITH A
BUNCH OF FOUNDING LEGISLATORS
WHO JOINED TOGETHER TO MOVE OUR
COUNTRY OUT OF THE BLOCKS AND
GET US STARTED AND EVERY
GENERATION SINCE THEN HAS FOUND
A WAY TO ADVANCE THE BALL DOWN
THE FIELD.
SO I'VE NEVER BEEN ONE WHO
WOULD-- INDULGES EVEN CYNICAL
FOLKS OR THAT KIND OF
NEGATIVITY.
I WANT TO FIND WAYS TO REALLY
FIND WAYS TO CREATE UNCOMMON
COALITIONS FOR UNCOMMON RESULTS.
AND I KNOW, I'M CONFIDENT, I
HAVE FAITH THAT WE CAN GET SOME
PRETTY REMARKABLE THINGS DONE IN
THIS COUNTRY THAT WE'RE STILL A
NATION WHERE IMPOSSIBLE DREAMS
CAN BE MADE REAL.
>> Ifill: WHICH IS MORE
IMPORTANT TO YOU, THAT YOU ARE
THE FOURTH ELECTED AFRICAN
AMERICAN TO THE U.S. SENATE IN
MODERN TIMES, OR THAT YOU ARE
THE 21st MAYOR TO GO
STRAIGHT TO THE U.S. SENATE?
>> I THINK THOSE ARE BOTH REALLY
IMPORTANT QUESTIONS.
THE FIRST, BEING THE FOURTH
AFRICAN AMERICAN, SPEAKS A LOT
TO OUR NATION AND REALLY TO MY
STATE THAT, THAT WAS NOT A
CENTRAL FEET NUR THIS CAMPAIGN,
EVEN, SHOWS A LOT OF EVOLUTION
OF OUR STATE.
THE LATTER TO ME IS A VERY
IMPORTANT.
BECAUSE WHEN I WATCH THE SENATE,
AND AGAIN, FROM A DISTANCE, AND
I DON'T WANT TO SAY THEY KNOW
ALL ABOUT THAT BODY OR MUCH
ABOUT THE INTERNAL WORKINGS, BUT
WHEN I STEP BACK, I OFTEN SEE
ISSUES THAT FACE URBAN SPACE SPN
AMERICA, THAT FACE URBAN ISSUES.
THEY'RE JUST NOT BEING
ADDRESSED.
AND A LACK OF URGENCY THAT I'VE
HAD TO LIVE WITH AS A MAYOR
EVERY SINGLE DAY THAT DOESN'T
SEEM TO BE MADE MANIFEST.
AND SO I WANT TO JOIN WITH IN TO
BELIEVE LIKE I DO THAT 85% OF
AMERICANS LIVE IN CITIES OR IN
THEIR SUBURBS AND THAT WE'VE
GOT-- IN FACT THE BROOKINGS
INSTITUTION NOW RIGHTFULLY IS
TALKING ABOUT IF YOU WANT TO
CREATE A ROBUST ECONOMY WHERE
THE MAJORITY OF OUR G.D.P. IS
DRIVEN IS IN OUR CITIES.
YOU HAVE TO HAVE AN URBAN VISION
FOR AMERICA.
AND I WANT TO GO DOWN THERE WITH
THE PRACTICAL SKILLS THAT I'VE
LEARNED AND ADD TO THAT
UNDERSTANDING AND THAT SENSE OF
URGENCY, BE AND THE REALITY THAT
IN AMERICA RIGHT NOW, THERE ARE
LARGE SWATHS OF OUR COUNTRY WHO
ARE LESS AND LESS SEEING THE
KIND OF SOCIAL MOBILITY THAT MY
PARENTS SAW, WHO ARE MORE AND
MORE FINDING THEMSELVES IN
TRAPPEDZ ECONOMICALLY THAT THEY
CAN'T ESCAPE BECAUSE THEY DON'T
HAVE ACCESS TO THE BASICS.
AND THAT'S A THREAT TO OUR
ECONOMY.
>> Ifill: NEWARK MAYOR CORY
BOOKER, SENATOR-ELECT FROM NEW
JERSEY, CONGRATULATIONSES AND
THANK YOU FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH, GWEN.
IT'S GREAT TO BE ON WITH YOU AND
TALK WITH YOU YET AGAIN.
>> Woodruff: NOW, MORE ON THE 16
DAY SHUTDOWN AND ITS
REPERCUSSIONS ON THE ENTIRE
AMERICAN ECONOMY AND ON THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT ITSELF.
FOR THE LATTER, WE TURN TO
SYLVIA MATHEWS BURWELL, THE
DIRECTOR OF THE ADMINISTRATION'S
OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET.
I SPOKE WITH HER A SHORT WHILE
AGO.
SYLVIA BURWELL, WELCOME TO THE
"NEWSHOUR."
>> THANKOU S YO MUCH FOR HAVING
ME, JUDY.
>> Woodruff: SO HOW SMOOTHLY
DID TODAY GO?
>> I THINK TODAY WENT RELATIVELY
SMOOTHLY, PEOPLE GOT BACK TO
WORK AND ARE STARTING TO BRING
THE GOVERNMENT BACK UP AS
QUICKLY AND EFFECTIVELY AS
POSSIBLE.
>> Woodruff: BUT 16 DAYS SHUT
DOWN.
WHAT ARE THE THE CHALLENGES OF
GETTING THE GOVERNMENT BACK UP
AND RUNNING OR SOME OF THE
GOVERNMENT BACK UP AND RUNNING
AFTER SOMETHING LIKE THIS?
>> SO, A NUMBER OF CHALLENGES.
THE FIRST WAS MAKING SURE THAT
EMPLOYEES KNEW, AND I THINK YOU
PROBABLY KNOW THAT THINGS WENT
QUITE LATE LAST NIGHT, SO MAKING
SURE WE HAD THINGS IN PLACE SO
GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES WOULD BE
NOTIFIED THAT THE GOVERNMENT
WOULD BE UP AND RUNNING WOULD BE
A STARTING ONE.
OTHERS HAVE TO DO WITH THINGS AS
SIMPLE AS INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
AND THE USE OF HANDHELDS AND
MOBILE DEVICES AND HOW THOSE
WORK AFTER FOR 16 DAYS NOT BEING
USE.
AND THEN THERE COMES SOME OF THE
LONGER TERM ISSUES OF THERE'S A
LOT OF WORK THAT'S BACKED UP
THAT PEOPLE WILL NEED TO FOCUS
ON.
FOR INSTANCE, DURING THIS TIME
PERIOD, WE HAD THE END OF THE
FISCAL YEAR.
SO JUST LIKENY A COMPANY, THE
GOVERNMENT NEEDS TO CLOSE OUT
ITS BOOKS AND SO NOW WE'LL HAVE
TO COME BACK, BRING EVERYBODY IN
AND CLOSE OUT THE BOOKS FOR THE
LAST FISCAL YEAR
TIME WE'RE MOVING FORWARD.
>> Woodruff: YOU HAD SOME
PEOPLE WHO WERE DESIGNATED AS
ESSENTIAL.
MORE, I THINK, THAN PEOPLE
EXPECTED.
I THINK, IN FACT, MOST
GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES WERE DISIG
NAIPTD AS ESSENTIAL.
HOW DO YOU EXPLAIN THAT?
DOES IT GIVE YOU A SORT OF NEW
UNDERSTANDING OF HOW THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT WORK AND WHAT YOU
WOULD DO THE NEXT TIME THERE'S A
SHUTDOWN?
>> SO, THE TERM THAT HAS
DEVELOPED OVER THE PERIOD FROM
1995, EVEN UNTIL NOW, IS
EXEMPTED EMPLOYEES.
IN TERMS OF WHAT IS OPEN IN THE
GOVERNMENT WHEN THERE IS A
SHUTDOWN, THERE ARE TWO MAIN
CATEGORIES.
ONE IS A CATEGORY OF PEOPLE
WHOSE FUNDING FRIDAY SOURCES--
COMES FROM SOURCE OTHER THAN THE
APPROPRIATIONS WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT.
THAT CAN BE IN THE FORM OF FEES
OR OTHER THINGS.
THE OTHER CATEGORY ARE EXEMPTED
EMPLOYEES AND THOSE ARE
EMPLOYEES THAT ARE EXEMPTED TO
PROTECT LIFE AND PROPERTY
USUALLY.
AND SO THOSE ARE OUR MILITARY
FORCES AND THOSE ARE PEOPLE THAT
DO CHECKING OF OUR FOOD AND FOOD
SAFETY, AND SO THOSE ARE SOME OF
THE EXEMPTED CATEGORIES.
>> Woodruff: SO THE FACT THAT
MOST PEOPLE, MOST GOVERNMENT
EMPLOYEES WERE DESIGNATED AS
ESSENTIAL, IT-- I GUESS IT
MADE-- IT MADE-- THERE WAS JUST
A QUESTION ABOUT I THINK THAT--
IT WASN'T EVERYBODY.
IF YOU'RE WORKING FOR THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT YREPORT YOU
ESSENTIAL?
>> WELL, I THINK THAT'S PART OF
WHY WE LIKE TO USE THE WORD
"EXEMPTED."
AND I THINK ONE OF THE THINGS
THAT HAS HAPPENED DURING THIS
TIME OF SHUTDOWN IS THERE HAS
COME TO BE A REALIZATION OF THE
MANY IMPORTANT FUNCTIONS THAT
PEOPLE SERVE IN GOVERNMENT, AND
WHETHER THAT'S HELPING PEOPLE
GET THEIR SMALL BUSINESS
ADMINISTRATION LOANS TO KEEP
MOVING THE ECONOMY FORWARD AND
CREATING JOBS OR MANY OF THE
OTHER FUNCTIONS THAT I THINK
PEOPLE MISSED DURING THIS TIME
WHEN THE GOVERNMENT WAS DOWN.
WE HAVE FOUR-- WE ACTUALLY HAVE
FIVE NOBEL PRIZE WINNERS THAT
WORK FOR THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT,
AND FOUR OF THOSE WERE ON
FURLOUGH.
>> Woodruff: FOR PEOPLE WHO
DON'T KNOW HOW THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT WORKS, FINALLY,
SYLVIA BURWELL, HOW DISRUPTIVE
WAS THIS?
>> IT WAS EXTREMELY DISRUPTIVE,
AND I THINK ANYONE CAN IMAGINE
WHEN SOMETHING IS SHUT DOWN IN &
WORKING IN WAYS IT SHOULDN'T BE.
EVERY DAY THERE ARE QUESTIONS.
THERE ARE APPLICATIONS OF LAW
AND NEW THINGS HAPPEN AND YOU
HAVE TO EVOLVE.
FOR INSTANCE, WHEN WE HEARD
ABOUT TROPICAL STORM KAREN, FEMA
NEEDED TO BRING PEOPLE BACK ON
IN ORDER THAT WE WOULD BE READY
TO HANDLE A STORM IF THAT STORM
HAD LANDED AND CAUSED DAMAGE.
ANOTHER EXAMPLE OF THINGS GOING
THE OTHER WAY IS AT ONE POINT IN
TIME, THE VETERANS' BENEFITS
TEAM RAN OUT OF MONEY, AND SO
OVER 7,000 PEOPLE WERE
FURLOUGHED, EVEN THOUGH THEY HAD
NOT BEEN FURLOUGHED NICIALGLY.
IT IS AN EVOLUTION AND CHANGING
THINGS THAT EVERY DAY BECAUSE
IT'S A VERY UNNATURAL AND
DAMAGING STATE.
>> Woodruff: SYLVIA BURWELL,
THE DIRECTOR OF THE OFFICE OF
MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET, THANK YOU
VERY MUCH.
>> HAPPY TO BE HERE.
>> Woodruff: AS FOR THE
SHUTDOWN'S EFFECTS ON THE
BROADER ECONOMY AND THE
UNCERTAINTY THAT SOME SEE GOING
FORWARD.
WE CHECK IN WITH TWO ECONOMISTS
WHO HAVE BEEN EXAMINING THIS:
BETH ANN BOVINO OF STANDARD AND
POOR'S AND MARK ZANDI OF MOODY'S
ANALYTICS.
WELCOME TO YOU BOTH.
SO MARK ZANDI, TO YOU FIRST.
HOW HAS THE BROADER ECONOMY BEEN
AFFECTED BY ALL THIS?
>> WELL, BY MY CALCULATION, THE
SHUTDOWN AND THE BRINKSMANSHIP
OVER THE DEBT LIMIT SHAVED BAY
HALF A PERCENTAGE POINT OFF
G.D.P. GROWTH.
THAT'S THE VALUE OF ALL THE
THINGS WE PRODUCEDDED, IN THE
FOURTH QUARTER OF IF TH YEAR.
THE RECOVERY CONTINUES, WE'RE
STILL GROWING, BUT BECAUSE OF
THESE EVENTS, WE'RE GOING TO
GROW A LOT MORE SLOWLY AND WE'RE
STILL GOING TO BE VERY
UNCOMFORTABLE WITH THE RATE OF
GROWTH WE'RE GETTING.
>> Woodruff: BETH ANN BOVINO,
WHAT WOULD YOU ADD TO THAT TO
HELP PEOPLE UNDERSTAND THE
EFFECT ON THE ECONOMY OVERALL?
>> WELL, I THINK-- I'M A LITTLE
BIT MORE CLOSE, BUT A LITTLE
MORE CONSERVATIVE ON WHAT I'M
EXPECTING.
I'M LOOKING FOR AUE KNOW, ABOUT
.6% OR $24 BILLION IN TERMS OF A
LOSS FROM THE GOVERNMENT
SHUTDOWN.
THERE, THOUGH, I'D ADD THAT ONE
OF THE REASONS WHY I'M A BIT
MORE CONCERNED IS THAT BECAUSE
EVEN THOUGH WE'VE HAD THE
SHUTDOWN, AGAIN, THE POLITICIANS
HAVE TO COME BACK TO THE
BARGAINING TABLE IN JUST A FEW
MONTHS, AND WHAT'S THAT KEY?
WELL, ANOTHER SHUTDOWN OR THE
RISK OF THE DEBT CEILING NOT
BEING INCREASED AS WELL.
ALL THESE THINGS ADD MORE
CONCERNS, MORE WORRIES,
LINGERING LOST CONFIDENCE, AND
THAT'S GOING TO KEEP PEOPLE FROM
SPENDING.
AND THIS IS RIGHT DURING THE
CHRISTMAS HOLIDAYS.
>> Woodruff: MARK ZANDI HOW
MUCH DOES THAT UNCERTAINTY ABOUT
WHETHER THERE'S GOING TO BE
ANOTHER SHUTDOWN IN A FEW MONTHS
AFFECT PEOPLE'S THINKING AND
BEHAVIOR?
>> YOU KNOW, I THINK THIS IS
VERY IMPORTANT.
AND I AGREE THAT THE-- BECAUSE
OF THE WAY THE DEAL HAS BEEN
STRUCTURED AND THE FACT THAT
THIS IS-- WE'RE GOING TO BE IN
THE MIDDLE OF THIS AGAIN IN THE
HOLIDAY SEASON, INTO NEXT YEAR,
THAT THIS IS GOING TO DO
CONTINUING DAMAGE.
AND IT'S CONSUMER CONFIDENCE AND
THEIR WILLINGNESS AND-- TO GO
OUT AND SPEND MORE AGGRESSIVELY,
BUT PERHAPS MORE IMPORTANTLY, IT
GOES TO BUSINESS PEOPLE AND
THEIR WILLINGNESS TO GO OUT AND
HIRE MORE AGGRESSIVELY AND TO
INVEST AND REALLY TAKE THOSE
RISKS THAT ARE KEY TO MAKING OUR
ECONOMY GROW MORE QUICKLY.
AND IN MY VIEW, AT THIS POINT,
THE KEY REASON WHY THIS ECONOMY
IS NOT GROWING MORE QUICKLY IS
BECAUSE OF THE UNSUPPORTER
CREATED BY-- UNCERTAINTY CREATED
BY WHAT'S GOING ON IN
WASHINGTON.
EVERY SIX MONTHS WE'RE BACK AT
THIS, AND THIS IS NOW STARTING
TO DO A LOT OF DAMAGE.
AND I REALLY DON'T THINK OUR
ECONOMY CAN KICK INTO THAT
HIGHER GEAR UNTIL WASHINGTON
REALLY ADDRESSES THIS ISSUE AND
GETS OFF THE FRONT PAGES OF OUR
NEWSPAPERS.
>> Woodruff: BETH ANN BOVINO,
CAN YOU BREAK IT DOWN BY SECTORS
TO SOME EXTENT.
TELL US HOW YOU SEE HOUSING, FOR
EXAMPLE, HIRING ACROSS THE
BOARD, TOURISM, OR BREAK IT DOWN
ANY WAY YOU WANT?
>> WITH NO NEW GOVERNMENT DATA,
I CAN CERTAINLY TRY.
LET'S SEE.
I MEAN, WE CAN START LOOKING AT
THE NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES THAT
WERE FURLOUGHED WITHOUT PAY.
AND THEN YOU WOULD ADD TO THAT--
I MEAN, I KNOW IT WAS 800,000 AT
ONCE, BUT IT WAS BRAET BRAUT
DOWN TO A LITTLE BIT LESS THAN
THAT.
BUT THEN YOU WOULD ADD ALL THE
ESSENTIAL WORKERS, INCLUDING A
FRIEND OF MINE, WHO WAS WORKING
WITHOUT PAY.
AND OF COURSE THE CONTRACT
WORKERS AS WELL.
WELL, THAT MEANS THOSE PEOPLE,
THEY DO GET THEIR PAYCHECKS BUT
I THINK BECAUSE OF THE
HEIGHTENED UNCERTAINTY GOING
FORWARD, THEY MIGHT BE A LITTLE
BIT RELUCTANT TO ACTUALLY SPEND
THAT BACKPAY.
YOU ADD TOURISM.
TOURISM, THEN, OF COURSE YOU
HAVE THE SHUTDOWN OF MONUMENTS
AND ALSO OF NATIONAL PARKS.
WELL, THAT MEANS THAT'S LOST
TOURIST REVENUE.
THAT GOES INTO G.D.P.
AND THAT'S NO LONGER AVAILABLE.
I BELIEVE SYLVIA HAD MENTIONED
EARLIER THAT YOU'RE LOOKING AT
WHAT HAPPENS WITH ALL THOSE
BUSINESSES THAT WANTED TO HAVE
LOANS, SMALL BUSINESS
ASSOCIATIONS WAS DOWN TO BARE
AGRICULTURAL DEPARTMENT.
THAT MEANT THAT FARMER LOANS,
SMALL BUSINESS LOANS WEREN'T
GETTING OUT AND SHE THAT MEANS
THOSE LOANS WERE REALLY WHAT
DRIVES THIS ECONOMY AND KEEPS
THINGS SLOW.
>> Woodruff: MARK ZANDI, ARE
THESE THINGS THAT CAN BOUNCE
BACK NOW THAT THE SHUTDOWN IS
BEHIND US?
OR IS THE DAMAGE LONGER LASTING?
>> WELL, WE'LL GET SOME OF THIS
BACK.
YOU KNOW, THE SMALL BUSINESS
ADMINISTRATION WILL GET UP AND
RUNNING AND MAKE THOSE LOANS.
THE FOLKS TRYING TO IMPORT AND
EXPORT GOODS WILL GET THEIR
PERMITS AND BE ABLE TO DO THAT.
THE MORTGAGE LENDERS WILL RAMP
IT BACK UP AGAIN.
AND OF COURSE THE FURLOUGHED
WORKERS ARE GOING TO COME BACK.
THEY'RE GOING TO GET PAID, AND
THEY'RE GOING TO START SPENDING
ON THE THINGS THEY DIDN'T SPEND
ON DURING THIS PERIOD.
SO WE'LL GET SOME OF IT BACK.
BUT WE'RE NOT GOING TO GET ALL
OF IT BACK, AND MORE
IMPORTANTLY, IF LAWMAKERS TAKE
US DOWN THIS VERY DARK ROAD
AGAIN EARLY NEXT YEAR, I FEAR
IT'S GOING TO UNDERMINE CONSUMER
CONFIDENCE AND BUSINESS
CONFIDENCE AND PERHAPS EVEN
INVESTOR CONFIDENCE TO THE
DEGREE THAT IT'S GOING TO START
DOING EVEN MORE DAMAGE, REAL
DAMAGE, AND WE'RE NOT GOING TO
BOUNCE BACK FROM THAT.
>> Woodruff: THERE WAS A BIT
OF A SCARE A FEW DAYS AGO, BETH
ANN BOVINO, WHEN FITCH'S RATING
SERVICE ANNOUNCED THEY WERE
PUTTING THE U.S. CREDIT RATING
ON A WATCH, I BELIEVE THEY
CALLED IT.
DOES SOMETHING LIKE THAT HAVE A
LINGERING EFFECT?
>> WELL, I WOULD SAY THAT ONE OF
THE-- I THINK ONE OF THE ISSUES,
LARGELY COMING FROM THE DEBT
CEILING DEBATES, THAT WHAT'S ON
TOP OF THE SHUTDOWN, ALL THOSE
TWO COMBINED, IT'S CERTAINLY
GOING TO HIT CONFIDENCE.
YOU CERTAINLY SAW BANKS INTEREST
RATES KIND OF ON THE NOT
NEAR-SHORT, MAYBE A THREE-MONTH,
SIX MONTHS, THEY'RE STILL RATHER
HIGH, AND THEY WERE HIGH DURING
THE WEEK.
THAT MEANT THAT BORROWING COSTS
ARE UP FOR INVESTORS.  THAT'S A
DRAG ON THE ECONOMY.
IN TERMS OF QUESTIONS OF WHETHER
THERE WILL BE ANOTHER DOWNGRADE,
OF COURSE I'M NOT A SOF-- I'M AN
ECONOMIST, NOT A SOVEREIGN'S
RATING ANALYST BUT THAT WILL
WEIGH ON INVESTORS' NEWS.
>> Woodruff: FINALLY MARK
ZANDI, WHAT DO YOU LOOK FOR IN
THE WEEKS TO COME TO SEE WHETHER
THE ECONOMY IS GETTING BACK TO
THE STATE WHERE IT WAS BEFORE
ALL THIS STARTED TO HAPPEN?
>> YOU KNOW, JUDY, FOR ME IT'S
ABOUT JOBS.
I THINK WE HAVE TO WATCH THESE
JOBS REPORTS.
I JUST PICKED UP AN E-MAIL JUST
BEFORE WE STARTED OUR
CONVERSATION.
IT LOOKS LIKE THE BUREAU OF
LABOR STATISTICS IS GOING TO
RELEASE SEPTEMBER JOB NUMBERS
NEXT WEEK, AND THE OCTOBER
NUMBERS A COUPLE OF WEEKS DOWN
THE ROAD.
THAT'S VERY, VERY IMPORTANT.
IF BUSINESSES STOPPED HIRING OR
EVEN STARTED LAYING OFF, AND JOB
GROWTH SLOWED SUBSTANTIVELY,
THEN WHAT HAPPENED IN WASHINGTON
ABOUT DA LOT MORE DAMAGE.
IF BUSINESS IS HEADLINE TOUGH, I
THINK WE'LL BE OKAY.
BUT IT'S REALLY QUITE CRITICAL
AT THIS POINT THAT LAWMAKERS GET
IT TOGETHER.
IF THEY DON'T, AT SOME POINT
BUSINESSES ARE GOING TO STOP
HIRING PEOPLE AND LAY OFF
WORKERS AND WE'RE NOT GOING TO
BOUNCE BACK.
>> Woodruff: MARK ZANDI,
MOODY'S ANALYTIC BETH ANN
BOVINO, STANDARD & POORS, THANK
YOU BOTH.
>> THANK YOU,.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: NEXT, CAN GUNS BE MADE
SAFER BY MAKING THEM SMARTER, SO
TO SPEAK?
RAY SUAREZ EXPLORES THE
POSSIBILITIES OF PERSONALIZING
GUN TECHNOLOGY.
>> THIS IS BUTTON NUMBER ONE,
TWO, THREE, FOUR.
>> Reporter: AT A FIRING RANGE
IN SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA, BELINDA
PADILLA PREPARES TO DEMONSTRATE
A NEW GUN.
THE GUN KNOWS IF YOU ARE ALLOWED
TO FIRE IT.
>> ONCE YOU SYNC THE WATCH TO
THE GUN IT IS NOW A PERSONALIZED
FIREARM AND YOU CAN NEVER USE IT
AS A REGULAR FIREARM, ONLY THE
AUTHORIZED USER WILL BE ABLE TO
SHOOT THE FIREARM.
>> Reporter: THE NEW HANDGUN,
MANUFACTURED BY THE GERMAN
COMPANY ARMATIX, USES RADIO
FREQUENCY BUILT INTO A
WRISTWATCH THAT MUST BE WORN TO
FIRE THE GUN.
SO THESE TWO UNITS SPEAK TO EACH
OTHER?
>> YES, IT IS RADIO FREQUENCY
TECHNOLOGY.
>> Reporter: BELINDA PADILLA IS
THE PRESIDENT AND CEO FOR THE
U.S. DIVISION OF ARMATIX.
A PERSONAL PIN OR CODE NUMBER
ACTIVATES THE GUN.
>> IF I ONLY WANT TO ACTIVATE
THE GUN FOR FOUR HOURS, OR TWO
HOURS, I CAN.
>> Reporter: THE ARMATIX GUN IS
NOT YET ON THE MARKET IN THE
U.S., BUT NATIONAL DATE EBTHIS
PAST YEAR OVER HOW TO DECREASE
GUN VIOLENCE HAS BROUGHT
ATTENTION TO OWNER-AUTHORIZED
TECHNOLOGIES.
>> THE PURPOSE IS TO PROVIDE
SAFETY FOR THE AMERICANS THAT
WANT TO PROTECT THEIR FAMILY.
>> Reporter: PADILLA SHOWED US
HOW THE GUN WONT FIRE WHEN TAKEN
AWAY.
>> WHAT VICTOR IS GOING TO DO IS
SHOOT A FEW ROUNDS, AND I'M
GOING TO DEMONSTRATE HOW THE
TECHNOLOGY WORKS, I'M GOING TO
TAKE THE FIREARM FROM HIM, ONCE
HE SHOT THE TWO ROUNDS, AND
YOU'LL SEE THE LIGHT TURN GREEN,
WHICH MEANS HE'S THE AUTHORIZED
USER, TURN TO RED, TO RED, WHICH
MEANS I'M THE UNAUTHORIZED USER,
AND THE FIREARM WILL NOT SHOOT.
>> Reporter: WELL, LET'S SEE.
THE RED LIGHT ON THE HANDGUN
INDICATES PADILLA IS NOT THE
OWNER.
>> IT WILL NOT FIRE.
>> Reporter: AND THEN HE TAKES
IT BACK AND IT DOESN'T HAVE TO
DO ANYTHING.
>> AND YES, THERE'S THE GREEN
LIGHT.
>> Reporter: LONG IN RESEARCH
AND DEVELOPMENT, OWNER-
AUTHORIZED GUNS LIKE ARMATIXS
HAVE BEEN DUBBED, SMARTGUNS.
OTHER PERSONALIZED TECHNOLOGIES
IN DEVELOPMENT INCLUDE THE USE
OF BIOMETRICS, LIKE
>> WHAT'S A PPKS .9 MILLIMETER.
HOLLYWOOD WOWED MOVIE GOERS WITH
THE PERSONALIZED GUN TECHNOLOGY
IN THE JAMES BOND MOVIE
"SKYFALL."
>> IT'S CODED TO YOUR PALM
PRINT.
ONLY YOU CAN FIRE IT.
>> Reporter: AND WHILE THE BOND
STYLE GUN IS NOW ONLY AVAILABLE
ON THE SILVER SCREEN, GUN SAFETY
ADVOCATES BELIEVE THE TIME IS
RIGHT FOR SUCH TECHNOLOGIES.
STEPHEN TERET, IS THE DIRECTOR
FOR THE CENTER FOR LAW AND THE
PUBLICS HEALTH AT JOHNS HOPKINS
BLOOMBERG SCHOOL OF PUBLIC
HEALTH.
HE BELIEVES NOT ENOUGH FOCUS IS
SPENT ON CHANGING THE DESIGN OF
GUNS AS A WAY TO DECREASE GUN
VIOLENCE.
>> INSTEAD OF SAYING TO PEOPLE,
HERE'S HOW YOU HAVE TO HANDLE
YOUR GUN, HERE'S HOW YOU HAVE TO
BEHAVE WITH YOU GUN, WE SHOULD
LOOK AT THE PRODUCT ITSELF, THE
GUN, AND SAY, "IS THERE
SOMETHING WE CAN DO TO THE GUN
TO REDUCE THE AMOUNT OF DEATHS?"
>> Reporter: THE LATEST GUN
DEATH FIGURES FROM 2010 REPORTED
MORE THAN 31,000 DEATHS FROM
FIREARMS.
61% OF THOSE, THREE OUT OF EVERY
FIVE, WERE SUICIDES, SOME OF
WHICH WERE TEENAGERS, BETWEEN 2%
AND 4% WERE ACCIDENTAL DEATHS,
AND THE REST-- MORE THAN 10,000-
- WERE HOMICIDES.
ARMATIX HOPES ITS TECHNOLOGY
WILL PREVENT SOME OF THOSE
DEATHS.
>> WE DON'T WANT CHILDREN
KILLING CHILDREN.
WE DON'T WANT MENTLY IALLL
COMMITTING SUICIDE.
OUR GOAL IS TO PROVIDE FIREARMS
THAT ARE SAFE, THAT ONLY THE
AUTHORIZED USER CAN FIRE.
>> Reporter: PROFESSOR TERET
SAYS TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGES TO
GUNS COULD MAKE A DIFFERENCE--
THE SAME WAY AUTOMOBILE DEATHS
DECREASED SHARPLY AFTER SAFETY
DEVICES LIKE SEATBELTS AND
AIRBAGS WERE INTRODUCED.
>> THE MOST EFFECTIVE TOOL WAS
CHANGING THE DESIGN OF CARS, AND
THAT'S IN LARGE PART WHY I
BELIEVE THAT WE AND DO THE SAME
THING WITH GUNS.
WE DO HAVE TO GET PEOPLE TO ACT
PRUDENTLY WITH THE GUN THAT THEY
HAVE, BUT IF WE CHANGE THE
PRODUCT, WE'RE GOING TO BE EVEN
MORE EFFECTIVE THAN TRYING TO
CHANGE THE BEHAVIOR OF HUNDREDS
OF MILLIONS OF PEOPLE.
>> Reporter: THAT IS NOT A VIEW
SHARED BY LAWRENCE KEANE FROM
THE NATIONAL SHOOTING SPORTS
FOUNDATION.
>> EVERY FIREARM CAN BE LOCK IN
SOME WAY WITHOUT THE USE OF SOME
HIGH TECH GADGETRY OR SO CALLED
SMARTGUNS.
>> Reporter: KEANE SAYS FOCUSING
ON PRODUCT SAFETY AND CHANGING
THE DESIGN OF GUNS IS
UNWARRANTED.
>> FIREARMS ARE SAFE IF THEY'RE
USED PROPERLY, AND SO, AND THE
STATICS SUPPORT THAT.
ACCIDENTS ARE DECLINING, FIREARM
MANUFACTURERS PROVIDING A
LOCKING DEVICE WITH THEIR
PRODUCTS FREE OF CHARGE, SO IF
YOU BUY A FIREARM TODAY, YOU'RE
GOING TO GET A LOCK WITH THAT
GUN, FEDERAL LAW REQUIRES LOCKS
TO BE PROVIDED BY THE DEALER
WHEN THEY SELL A HANDGUN, FOR
EXAMPLE.
>> Reporter: ARMATIX AGREES THAT
MEANWHILE, POLITICS HAS TAKEN
AIM AT THE GUN MARKET WITH THE
INTRODUCTION OF A LAW THAT WOULD
MANDATE THE SALE OF SO-CALLED
SMARTGUNS.
CONGRESSMAN JOHN TIERNEY OF
MASSACHUSETTS INTRODUCED THE
PERSONALIZED HANDGUN SAFETY ACT
OF 2013 WHICH WOULD NOT ONLY
FUND MORE RESEARCH FOR OWNER-
AUTHORIZED GUNS BUT MANDATE ITS
SALES.
>> IT GIVES A TWO-YEAR PERIOD OF
TIME, AFTER WHICH ALL THE
MANUFACTURERS HAVE TO SELL ONLY
HANDGUNS THAT ARE PERSONALIZED,
WHETHER THEY USE THE RADIO
TECHNOLOGY, OR FINGERPRINT, OR
PALM PRESSURE.
>> Reporter: AND WHILE TIERNEY'S
BILL HAS LITTLE CHANCE OF
PASSING THE CONGRESSMAN SAYS HE
WANTS THE LEGISLATION TO BRING
ATTENTION TO ACCIDENTAL CHILD
FIREARM DEATHS.
TIERNEY POINTS TO CASES LIKE
THAT OF 14-YEAR-OLD BRIAN
CROWELL-- A BOY IN HIS
MASSACHUSETTS DISTRICT-- WHO IN
1997 WAS SHOT AND KILLED
ACCIDENTALLY BY A LOADED GUN IN
HIS BEST FRIEND'S HOUSE.
ANN MARIE CROWELL IS BRIAN'S
MOTHER.
>> THE GUN WENT OFF, AND IT HIT
BRIAN RIGHT IN THE NECK, AND THE
LAST WORDS HE SAID TO HIS FRIEND
WERE, "I CAN'T BELIEVE YOU SHOT
ME."
HE RAN OUT OF THE ROOM, AND HE
ATTEMPTED TO RUN HOME, AND HE
ONLY MADE IT DOWN THE STAIRS TO
THE LIVING ROOM IN THE BOY'S
HOUSE, AND COLLAPSED ON THE
FLOOR.
IT WAS LIFE CHANGING FOR THE
FAMILY.
>> Reporter: SINCE THE ACCIDENT
CROWELL WORKS TO GET PARENTS TO
ASK OTHER PARENTS IF GUNS IN
THEIR HOUSE ARE SAFELY STORED
AND LOCKED.
SHE SUPPORTS THE LEGISLATION.
>> I'M NOT AGAINST PEOPLE
WANTING TO FEEL SAFE IN THEIR
OWN HOME, BUT WHAT IS WRONG WITH
HAVING A LITTLE MORE SAFEGUARDS
TO IT?
>> Reporter: BUT LAWRENCE KEANE
DOESN'T BELIEVE THE PERSONALIZED
GUNS ARE SAFER AND SAYS MANDATES
ARE THE WRONG WAY TO GO.
>> THE INDUSTRY IS NOT OPPOSED
TO THE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
OF THIS TECHNOLOGY, WHAT WE ARE
OPPOSED TO IS LEGISLATIVE
MANDATES TO REQUIRE THIS ONE
SIZE FITS ALL TECHNOLOGY FOR ALL
FIREARMS OWNERS, AND WE DON'T
THINK THAT THAT'S THE WAY THINGS
OUGHT TO WORK.
YOU CAN BRING A PRODUCT TO
MARKET, IF THERE'S CONSUMER
DEMAND, CONSUMERS WILL BUY IT,
BUT YOU SHOULDN'T FORCE IT UPON
ALL CONSUMERS.
>> Reporter:RMAT AIX HOPES TO
HAVE ITS OWNER AUTHORIZED GUN
AVAILABLE FOR SALE IN THE U.S.
THIS FALL.
>> Woodruff: NEXT, WE TAKE A
CLOSER LOOK AT FACEBOOK'S
DECISION TO RELAX RULES ABOUT
WHAT TEENS CAN SHARE ONLINE.
THE CHANGES MEAN THAT TEENS
BETWEEN 13 AND 17 YEARS OLD
COULD SHARE WHATEVER THEY POSTED
WITH THE GENERAL PUBLIIF TC HEY
WISH TO DO SO.
BUT FACEBOOK ALSO SAID THAT
IT WOULD POST TWO REMINDERS LIKS
WERE AWARE OF THE RISKS OF
POSTING INFORMATION.
THE MOVE HAS RAISED CONCERNS
ANEW ABOUT PRIVACY ONLINE.
HARI SREENIVASAN HAS OUR
CONVERSATION.
>> Sreenivasan: AND FOR THAT, WE
TURN TO STEPHEN BALKAM OF THE
FAMILY ONLINE SAFETY INSTITUTE,
A GROUP REPRESENTING MAJOR
PLAYERS IN THE TECH INDUSTRY.
HE'S A MEMBER OF FACEBOOK'S
SAFETY ADVISORY BOARD.
AND JIM STEYER, FOUNDER AND
C.E.O. OF COMMON SENSE MEDIA, A
NOT-FOR-PROFIT GROUP THAT
STUDIES THE IMPACT OF TECHNOLOGY
ON KIDS.
SO JIM STEYER, LET ME START WITH
YOU.
WHAT'S YOUR CONCERN ABOUT THESE
CHANGES?
>> FACEBOOK'S PRIVACY POLICIES
ARE SORT OF LIKE THE WEATHER--
THEY'RE CONSTANTLY CHANGING.
THAT'S ABOUT THE ONLY THING YOU
CAN BE SURE OF.
AND AS THE PARENT OF FOUR AND
RUNNING THE BIGGEST KIDS' MEDIA
GROUP IN THE COUNTRY, YOU KNOW
THAT THESE PRIVACY POLICIES ARE
GOING TO CONFUSE PARENTS, BUT
MOST OF ALL THEY'RE GOING TO
CONTINUE TO ERODE SOME OF THE
PRIVACY RIGHTS OF CHILDREN AND
TEENS WHO ARE ON FACEBOOK.
WE REALLY ARE PARTICULARLY
CONCERNED THAT IN MANY CASES,
KIDS WILL SELF-REVEAL BEFORE
THEY SELF-REFLECT, PUT OUT
INFORMATION THAT CAN BE DAMAGING
TO THEM, CAN BE BULLYING TO
OTHERS.
AND IN A PUBLIC CONTEXT, THE
CONSEQUENCES CAN BE BIGGER.
SO WE HAVE A LOT OF CONCERNS
ABOUT THIS LATEST SET OF CHANGES
TO THE PRIVACY POLICIEAT
FACEBOOK.
>> Sreenivasan: STEPHEN BALKA
BALKAM, WHAT ABOUT THOSE
RESERVATIONS?
>> ACTUALLY, THE FIRST THING TO
BE SAID IS WE APPLAUD FACEBOOK'S
CHANGES TO DEFAULT TO FRIENDS
ONLY FOR TEERMS.
THIS IS SOMETHING WE'VE BEEN
TALKING TO THEM ABOUT FOR QUITE
SOME TIME, SO WE ACTUALLY THINK
THAT'S GOING TO ADD TO THE
SAFETY AND PRIVACY OF TEENAGERS.
THE OTHER CHANGE REGARDING
ALLOWING TEENS TO POST PUBLICLY,
I THINK THAT YOU HAVE TO
CONSIDER DO TEENAGERS HAVE ANY
FREE EXPRESSION RIGHTS?
LET'S TAKE MALAL, THE
16-YEAR-OLD PAKISTANA GIRL SHOT
BY THE TALIBAN, I MEAN SHE HAS
CREATED A GLOBAL PHENOMENON AND
CAMPAIGN, BUT UP UNTIL NOW, HAS
NOT BEEN ABLE TO DO THAT ON
FACEBOOK.
SO ACTUALLY, I THINK IN SOME
WAYS, THIS IS A VERY GOOD STEP.
>> Sreenivasan: JIM STEYER,
ISN'T THIS THE TYPE OF
TRANSPARENCY THAT PRIVACY GROUPS
HAVE TRIED TO ADVOCATE FOR AND
ASK FACEBOOK FOR?
>> NO, DEFINITELY NOT.
I WOULD NOT SAY THAT AT ALL,
HARI.
I THINK WHAT THIS REALLY IS, IS
PRIMARILY AN EFFORT TO MONETIZE
THE PERSONAL INFORMATION OF
TEENAGERS.
THE PUBLIC NATURE OF THE POST
THAT'S NOW PERMITTED WILL ALLOW
FACEBOOK TO ACTUALLY USE THOSE
IN SPONSORED STORIES, WHICH ARE
THE MOST LUCRATIVE FORM OF
ADVERTISING, WHEN YOU TALK ABOUT
THE MATERIAL THAT CHILDREN AND
TEENS-- REMEMBER, ONE OF THE BIG
CONCERNS THAT PRIVACY ADVOCATES
HAVE WITH FACEBOOK IS THAT THERE
ARE MILLIONS OF KIDS UNDER THE
AGE OF 13 WHO ARE ALSO ON
FACEBOOK.
AND THEY DON'T HAVE THE IMPULSE
CONTROL AS CHILDREN OR AS TEENS
TO THINK THROUGH WHAT THEY'RE
GOING TO POST.
SO WHILE STEVEN'S RIGHT THERE
CAN BE VERY GOOD USAGE OF PUBLIC
POSTINGS LIKE MALALA, THE FAR
MORE FREQUENT PUBLIC POSTINGS
CAN BE THINGS DAMAGE OF DAMAGING
TO KIDS' REPUTATIONS, THAT CAN
BE FORMS OF CYBER BULLYING.
AND AGAIN, TEENS OFTEN TIME
SELF-REVEAL BEFORE THEY
PRIVACY, WHILE WE DO APPRECIATE
THE FACT THAT KIDS DO NEED A
VOICE AND I'M A FIRST AMENDMENT
LAW PROFESSOR AT STANFORD, SO I
REALLY LIKE THAT, IN GENERAL,
THIS IS AN EROSION OF PRIVACY
FOR KIDS AND TEENS THAT PRIVACY
ADVOCATES I THINK IN GENERAL ARE
PRETTY CONCERNED ABOUT.
>> Sreenivasan: STEPHEN
BALKAM, I WANT TO GET TO THE
CYBER BULLYING IN A MINUTE, BUT
SOMETHING JIM SAID, BASICALLY
IT'S THE OLD ADAGE-- IF YOU
CAN'T SEE THE PRODUCT, YOU ARE
THE PRODUCT.
ARE THESE CHANGES PRIMARILY SO
FACEBOOK CAN MAKE MORE MONEY.
A LOT OF PARENTS ARE ALREADY
VERY TENUOUS ABOUT LETTING THEIR
KIDS ON SOCIAL NETWORKS AND I
THINK THERE'S A HIGH CREEP
FACTOR WHEN THEY TALK ABOUT THE
CONTENT THESE CHILDREN ARE
GENERATING ACTUALLY SELLING
PRODUCT.
>> WELL, EVERYTHING THAT I'VE
READ, THIS HAS NOT CHANGED AT
ALL THE ADVERTISING TOWARDS
CHILDREN OR ADULTS, FOR THAT
MATTER.
THE SPONSORED STORIES WILL STILL
BE JUST SENT TO FRIENDS ONLY.
SO THERE'S NO CHANGE IN THE
ADVERTISING SIDE, AND IF THERE
IS FURTHER DOWN THE ROAD, WE'LL
BE THE FIRST TO RAISE A RED
FLAG.
YOU KNOW, I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT
TO ALSO RECOGNIZE THAT FACEBOOK
IS INCORPORATED TEACHABLE
MOMENTS AS A CHILD CHOOSES A
PUBLIC SETTING TO SEND OUT THEIR
POSTS AND WILL BE REMINDED ON
SEVERAL OCCASIONS.
SO THEY'VE GONE WELL BEYOND WHAT
MANY OTHER SOCIAL NETWORKS ARE
DOING AT THE MOMENT.
>> Sreenivasan: STEPHEN
BALKAM, I WANT TO STICK WITH YOU
FOR A SECOND.
WHAT JIM STEYER SAID ABOUT CYBER
BULLYING IS ALSO KIND OF
INTERESTING TO US.
AS WE MAKE THIS CONTENT ACROSS
SOCIAL NETWORKS MORE PERMANENT
AND PERHAPS MORE SEARCHABLE,
DOESN'T THAT ENABLE OTHER TEENS
TO START USING THAT CONTENT IN
PERHAPS A CAMPAIGN ON CYBER
BULLYING, JUST LIKE A PROCTER &
GAMBLE COULD USE THAT LITTLE
QUOTE TO HELP SELL BLEACH?
>> WE CERTAINLY NEED A NATIONAL
DIALOGUE AND A NATIONAL CAMPAIGN
ON CYBER BULLYING, AND BULLYING
UNDER GENERALLY.
I THINK WE ALL HAVE TO THINK
BEFORE WE POST.
I WOULD ALSO SAY THAT FACEBOOK
AND YOUTUBE AND GOOGLE PLUS
ALREADY PROVIDE DELETE BUTTONS,
BY THE WAY, FOR STUFF THAT
PEOPLE PUT OUT THERE, KIDS
THEMSELVES THAT THEY WOULD
PREFER TO RETRACT.
HAVING SAID THAT, SURE.
I MEAN, IF YOU PUT STUFF OUT
THERE, YOU HAVE TO BE AWARE THAT
IT CAN BE REPLICATED AND IT CAN
BE SENT ANYWHERE ON THE
INTERNET.
SO WE ALL HAVE TO RAISE OUR
AWARENESS OF HOW WE USE DIGITAL
MEDIA.
>> Sreenivasan: JIM STEYER,
HOW ABOUT THAT NOTION OF SOME
SEMBLANCE OF PERSONAL
RESPONSIBILITY.
NOBODY IS FORCING TO YOU JOIN
THESE SOCIAL NETWORKS.
YOU CAN PERHAPS KEEP YOUR CHILD
OFF OF ONE UNTIL A CERTAIN AGE
IF YOU'RE INCREDIBLY GOOD AT
POLICING THEM.
>> IT'S TOUGH.
I CAN TELL YOU, AS THE DAD OF
FOUR.
YOU KNOW, OF COURSE PERSONAL
RESPONSIBILITY DOES MATTER.
YOU KNOW, COMMON SENSE, WE ARE
PIONEERS IN THE FIELD OF
TEACHING KIDS DIGITAL LITERACY
AND CITIZENSHIP.
BUT THE BOTTOM LINE IS PRETTY
CLEAR-- KIDS HAVE MUCH LESS
IMPULSE CONTROL THAN PARENTS DO,
AND THAT'S TRUE FOR CHILDREN AS
WELL AS TEENS.
MILLIONS AND MILLIONS OF WHOM
ARE ON
SO THE DOWNSIDE RISKS HERE ARE
VERY SUBSTANTIAL, AND THE MORE
PUBLIC THIS BECOMES AND MORE
THAT KIDS ARE ENCOURAGED TO BE
PUBLIC BY FACEBOOK, PRIMARILY IN
OUR OPINION FOR MONTIZATION
REASONS, THE MORE LIKELIHOOD OF
SIGNIFICANT CONSEQUENCES AND
DAMAGES IN WHICH CYBER BULLYING
IS ONE OF THE BIG ONES.
AND THAT IS SOMETHING THAT IS A
PHENOMENON THAT EVERY PARENT,
EVERY SCHOOL, AND EVERY
COMMUNITY IN THIS COUNTRY IS
AWARE OF.
AND SO WHILE FACEBOOK DOES-- HAS
MADE SOME POP-UP REMINDERS NOW,
WHICH I THINK IS A POSITIVE
THING, STEVEN MENTIONED THOSE--
IN GENERAL, THIS IS A VERY
TROUBLING STREND TREPPED.
THE BOTTOM LINE IS IT'S BEING
DRIF BEAN A COMMERCIAL
IMPERATIVE AT THE TECH INDUSTRY.
IT'S NOT BEING DRIVEN BY THE
BEST INTEREST OF CHILDREN AND
TEENS, PERIOD.
>> Sreenivasan: JIM STEYER,
STEPHEN BALKAM, THANKS SO MUCH
FOR YOUR TIME.
>> THANK YOU.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING US.
>> Ifill: AS WASHINGTON
CONTINUES TO MOVE ALMOST
BREATHLESSLY FROM CRISIS TO
CRISIS, IT SEEMS LIKE A GOOD
TIME TO TAKE A STEP BACK AND
EXAMINE THE POLITICAL HISTORY
AND PHILOSOPHIES THAT BRING US
TO THE BRINK, AGAIN AND AGAIN.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS THAT.
>> Brown: IN THOSE LARGER TERMS,
JUST WHAT IS IT THAT WE'RE
WITNESSING TODAY IN AMERICAN
POLITICS?
AND WHAT IMPACT DOES IT HAVE ON
CITIZENS?
AUTHOR ERIC LIU LOOKS AT THESE
QUESTIONS AS FOUNDER OF "CITIZEN
UNIVERSITY" WHICH SEEKS TO
ENGAGE PEOPLE ON PROGRESSIVE
ISSUES.
HE SERVED AS AN ADVISER TO
FORMER PRESIDENT BILL CLINTON.
STEVEN HAYWARD IS A VISITING
SCHOLAR IN CONSERVATIVE THOUGHT
AND POLICY AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
COLORADO BOULDER.
AND HISTORIAN BEVERLY GAGE OF
YALE UNIVERSITY JOINS US ONCE
AGAIN.
SHE STUDIES POLITICAL MOVEMENTS
IN U.S. HISTORY.
WELL, ERIC LIU, I WANT TO START
WITH YOU WITH SOMETHING YOU SAID
TO OUR PRODUCER IN THINKING
ABOUT THESE ISSUES.
YOU SAID PEOPLE HAVE STOPPED
DRAWING ANY KIND OF LINE BETWEEN
POL DISPIKS GOVERNMENT.
NOW WHAT DOES THAT MEAN, AND
WHAT KIND OF LINE SHOULD THERE
BE?
>> I THINK THE REALITY IS THAT,
THAT LINE IS ALWAYS HARD TO
DRAW, BUT THERE IS A DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN POLITICKING AND TRYING
TO APPEAL TO ONE'S BASE IN
ELECTORAL TERMS, ON THE ONE
HAND, AND ON THE OTHER HAND,
ACTUALLY JUST GOVERNING, RUNNING
THE OPERATIONS OF GOVERNMENT,
AND WHAT WE SAW OVER THE LAST
TWO WEEKS WAS A VERY DANGEROUS
BLURRING OF THAT LINE, WHERE
THE, FOR POLITICAL PURPOSES, WE
WERE WILLING, AS A COUNTRY TO,
GO ALMOST TO THE BRINK OF
PUTTING OUR FULL FAITH AND
CREDIT ON THE LINE, AND STOPPING
THE FUNCTIONING OF GOVERNMENT
ALL TOGETHER.
AND I THINK THAT'S THE TRICKY
SPOT HERE IS THAT OF COURSE
THERE IS NO PURITY IN
GOVERNMENT.
BUT THE QUESTION IS AS CITIZENS,
CAN WE IN FACT HAVE A CERTAIN
MEASURE OF FULL FAITH IN THE WAY
THAT THINGS OPERATE EVERY DAY IN
GOVERNMENT AND NOT TREAT IT AS
JUST ANOTHER FOOTBALL IN THE
CONSTANT POLITICAL GAMES.
>> Brown: LET ME ASK STEVEN
HAYWARD TO ANSWER THAT, RESPOND
TO THAT.
WHAT DO YOU SEE HAPPENING IN
TERMS OF POLITICAL MOVEMENTS,
SUCH AS THE TEA PARTY, AND
ATTITUDES TODAY ABOUT
GOVERNMENT.
>> RIGHT, WELL, THAT'S-- YOU
KNOW, A BIG TANGLE THERE.
I CAN TAKE ERIC'S DISTINCTION
BETWEEN POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT
UP TO A POINT, BUT I THINK I
WOULD SAY BACK THAT THE BIGGER
GOVERNMENT EXWETS, AND THE MORE
THINGS BECOME POLITICIZED AND
CENTRALIZED IN WASHINGTON, THE
MORE WE'RE GOING TO HAVE THESE
FUNDAMENTAL CLASHES OVER OUR
DISAGREEMENTS, DEEP
DISAGREEMENTS.
I THINK IF YOU TAKE THE LONG
VIEWSH THE WAY I'VE BEEN
EXPLAINING IT IS THIS-- IF YOU
GO BACK 40 YEARS AGO AND THINK
ABOUT THE ANTIWAR MOVEMENT AND
HOW IT TRANSFORMED THE
DEMOCRATIC PARTY, THE TEA PARTY
IS NOW THE REPUBLICANS' VERSION
OF THAT.
IF YOU THINK BACK TO THE WAR
MOVEMENT, A LOT OF PEOPLE DIDN'T
LIKE THEIR TACTICS AND
DISPOSITIONS -- A LOT OF
LIBERALS-- BUT THEY DID TEND TO
AGREE WITH A LOT OF THEIR POINT
OF VIEW.
TODAY, THE TEA PARTY, WHILE A
LOT OF PEOPLE, EVEN IN THE
REPUBLICAN PARTY DON'T LIKE THE
TEA PARTY BECAUSE IT SEEMS TO
LACK PRUDENCE, SENSIBLE COOL
CLAIGZ ABOUT THINGS, THEY DO
AGREE WITH THEIR AIMS, AND THEY
DO AGREE THAT THERE'S SOMETHING
DEEPLY WRONG WITH OUT-OF-CONTROL
GOVERNMENT.
>> Brown: BEVERLY GAGE, YOU
OFTEN LOOK BACK FOR US.
IDEOLOGICAL DIVISIONS, OF
COURSE, ARE NOTHING NEW IN
AMERICAN POLITICS, BUT WHAT DO
YOU SEE THAT CAN HELP US
UNDERSTAND WHAT'S JUST BEEN
HAPPENING THESE LAST FEW WEEKS?
>> IT'S CERTAINLY TRUE THAT
IDEOLOGICAL DIVISIONS ARE NOT
NEW.
I THINK THE THING THAT'S NEW
ABOUT WHOSE HAPPENING NOW IS
REALLY THE FREQUENCY WITH WHICH
WE ARE HAVING THESE CRISES.
SO AS SOON AS ONE IS RESOLVED,
WE'RE ALREADY STARTING THE
COUNTDOWN TOWARD THE NEXT
CRISIS.
AND IT DOESN'T SEEM LIKE THERE'S
ANYONE OUT THERE WHO REALLY HAS
A DEFINITIVE SOLUTION ABOUT HOW
THAT'S GOING TO END.
AND SO WHILE WE HAVE HAD THESE
CONFLICTS IN THE PAST.
>> REALLY DON'T THINK THAT WE'VE
HAD THEM AT THIS LEVEL OF ONE
AFTER ANOTHER AFTER
>> Brown: AND SO, ERIC LIU,
LET ME ASK YOU, BECAUSE I KNOW
YOU'RE TRYING TO ENGAGE PEOPLE
IN THE ACT OF CITIZENSHIP, WHAT
DO YOU SEE THE EFFECT OF ALL OF
THIS?
ARE THEY MORE ENGAGED?
ARE THEY JUST MORE DISGUSTED AND
TURNED OFF?
>> WELL, I DON'T THINK THOSE ARE
MUTUALLY EXCLUSIVE.
THERE IS DISGUST, BUT BECAUSE OF
THE DISGUST, THERE'S ACTUALLY
MORE ENGAGEMENT.
AND THAT'S TRUE ON BOTH THE LEFT
AND THE RIGHT.
LOOK, I THINK THE REALITY IS
WHEN STEVEN WAS SPEAK A MOMENT
AGO ABOUT THE ENCROACHMENT OF
EVER-GROWING, AND EVER-LARGER
GOVERNMENT, WE CAN HAVE
REASONABLE DEBATES IN THIS
COUNTRY ABOUT WHAT THE PROPER
SIZE AND SCOPE OF GOVERNMENT
OUGHT TO BE, BUT WE OUGHT TO
REGARD THOSE DEBATES NOT AS
ON-OFF, YES-NO, MY WAY OR WE
SHUT THE WHOLE THING DOWN KIND
OF DEBATES.
I THINK THE DANGER OF THE TEA
PARTY ARGUMENT THAT EVERY NEW
THING, WHETHER IT'S OBAMAED
CARE, OR SOMETHING ELSE, IS
ANOTHER SLIDE DOWN THE SLIPPERY
SLOPE, LOOK THE BOTTOM LINE FOR
RESPONSIBLE CITIZENSHIP IS OUR
JOB IS TO BUILD STEMS ON THE
SLIPPERY SLOPE.
IT'S NOT TO SAY IF YOU TAKE ONE
LITTLE STEP IT'S DOWN TO
OBLIVION AND TYRANNY.
OUR JOB IS TO FIGURE OUT HOW DO
WE NEGOTIATE THESE BALANCES, HOW
DO KEY CALCULATE, IF BY
TEMPERAMENT OR IDEOLOGY YOU ARE
NOT WANTING TO CALIBRATE OR
COMPROMISE THEN WE'RE GOING TO
HAVE A POLITICS OF PERPETUAL
CRISIS.
I THINK PEOPLE ARE READY TO HEAR
EACH OTHER AND SEE ONE ANOTHER
AND NOT THE CARICATURES OF ONE
ANOTHER AND TRY TO FIGURE OUT
WHERE IS IT THAT WE CAN MANAGE
TO AGREE ON THE ROLE OF
GOVERNMENT, AND WHERE WE CAN'T E
SHOT-SUDDENLY DEATH GAME.
IT'S INFINITE REPEAT PLAY AND
YOU'RE GOING TO WIN SOME, AND
I'M GOING TO WIN SOME.
>> Brown: LET ME ASK STEVEN
HAYWARD TO RESPOND TO THIS.
DO YOU SEE THE RESULT OF THIS AS
PEOPLE READY TO WORK TOGETHER OR
MORE DIVISIONS THAT EVER MORE
POLARIZES?
>> I THINK THERE ARE TWO THINGS
TO THINK ABOUT HERE.
ONE IS WE HAVE DIVIDED
GOVERNMENT ONCE AGAIN.
THE VOTERS, GOD BLESS THEM, HAVE
A LOT OF COGNITIVE DISSONANCE.
IN THE LAST WEEK, WHAT YOU SAW
IS PEOPLE SAY, "I DON'T LIKE
OBAMACARE, BUT I DON'T WANT THE
GOVERNMENT SHUT DOWN.
I DON'T WANT IT TO BE A MATTER
OF A BUDGET FIGHT THE WAY IT'S
BECOME."
THAT'S WHY REPUBLICANS LOST THIS
BATTLE.
BUT IF YOU LOOK AT SOME OF THE
POLL NUMBERS RIGHT NOW, I THINK
THEY OUGHT TO BE VERY WORRYING
FOR EVERYBODY, BUT I THINK MORE
WORRYING FOR LIBERALS FOR THIS
REASON.
YOU'VE SEEN RECORD HIGH NUMBERS
OF PEOPLE WHO NOW SAY-- I THINK
65% IN ONE POLL-- THAT
GOVERNMENT IS A THREAT TO THEIR
RIGHTS.
YOU'VE SEEN A LONG-TERM TREND
GOING BACK REALLY TO THE NINE
1960s OF THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE
SAYING THEY HAVE CONFIDENCE THAT
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT WILL DO
THE RIGHT THING DOWN IN 15%,
20%, WHEN IT USED TO BE IN THE
50s, UP TO 60, 70%.
TO THE EXTENT THAT YOU'RE
LIBERAL AND YOU BELIEVE IN
POLITICAL SOLUTIONS TO OUR
SOCIAL PROBLEMS OR GOVERNMENT
ENGAGEMENT WITH OUR PROBLEMS,
YOU WANT THE PUBLIC TO HAVE
CONFIDENCE IN THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT'S CAPACITIES AND SO
IT SEEMS TO ME AS MUCH AS THIS
MIGHT HAVE BEEN A TRAIN WRECK
FOR REPUBLICANS THE LONG-TERM
EFFECTES OF THIS MIGHT NOT
NECESSARILY PLAY OUT THAT WAY.
>> Brown: BEVERLY, WHEN YOU
LOOK BACK AT WHAT COULD BE
CALLED POLICE CRISES OF THE
PAST-- POLITICAL CRISES OF THE
PAST, WHAT HAPPENS IN TERMS OF
PUBLIC RESPONSE TO THOSE?
>> I THINK TO SOME DEGREE,
STEVEN'S QUITE RIGHT?
THAT I WOULD KIND OF LIKE TO
SUBSCRIBE TO ERIC'S VIEW THAT
WE'RE GOING TO HAVE A MUCH MORE
SERIOUS CONVERSATION, A MUCH
MORE BIPARTISAN CONVERSATION,
BUT I THINK IT'S EQUALLY
POSSIBLE THAT YOU'RE ACTUALLY
GOING TO SEE PEOPLE THROW THEIR
HANDS UP AND SAY, "IT'S ALL SUCH
A MESS.
I DON'T REALLY WANT TO MAKE
SENSE OF IT.
I DON'T WANT TO DEAL WITH IT."
IN THAT WAY, IT SORT OF SERVES
AN ANTIGOVERNMENT MESSAGE, AND
IN SOME WAYS, EVEN SERVES SORT
OF A TEA PARTY MESSAGE IN WAYS
THAT MAYBE WERE INTEND SPD MAYBE
WEREN'T.
BUT I THINK THERE'S ALSO A
DANGER FOR THE REPUBLICAN PARTY
IN ALL OF THIS WHICH IS TO SAY
THAT'S THESE DIVISIONS THAT
WE'RE SEEING RIGHT NOW WITHIN
THE REPUBLICAN PARTY BETWEEN
MODERATES AND TEA PARTY
CONSERVATIVES AND ALSO BETWEEN A
SORT OF ESTABLISHMENT BUSINESS
CLASS, WHICH IS VERY, VERY
ALARMED ABOUT WHAT'S HAPPENING,
AND THIS MORE RIGHT WING PART OF
THE PARTY, THAT ACTUALLY MAY IN
FACT SPELL DESTRUCTION FOR THE
REPUBLICAN PARTY.
THOSE ARE DIVISION THALZ HAVE
BEEN THERE FOR A LONG TIME.
THEY'VE OFTEN BEEN PAPERED OVER.
BUT WHEN YOU'RE ON THE BRINK OF
FINANCIAL CATASTROPHE IN THE WAY
THAT WE WERE, WE MAY NOT SEE
THEM BE PAPERED OVER, AND WE MAY
IN FACT SEE SOME SORT OF
POLITICAL REALIGNMENT COMING OUT
OF THIS.
>> Brown: WE HAVE JUST WITH A
MINUTE LEFT, ERIC LIU I WANT TO
ASK YOU BRIEFLY 30 SECONDS AND
GIVE STEVEN HAYWARD THE SAME, IS
THIS SOME KIND OF EVOLVING SENSE
OF COMMON GOOD THAT WE'RE
SEEING?
HOW DOES THAT FIT INTO WHAT
WE'RE WATCHING?
>> WELL, LOOK, THIS IS A
QUESTION FOR US, FOR THE VIEWERS
RIGHT NOW TO, DECIDE.
THIS IS NOT GOING TO BE A THING
THAT EITHER SPEAKER BOEHNER OR
PRESIDENT OBAMA WAVEAISE WAND
AND SAYS, "WE WILL NOW ENTER A
PERIOD OF CIVILITY AND COMMON
CAUSE.
WE HAVE TO DECIDE AS CITIZENS
WHAT KIND OF TONE WE'RE GOING TO
SET, WHAT KIND OF ENGAGEMENT
WE'RE GOING TO ASK OF
OURSELVESES AND OUR LEADERS.
AND I COTHINK THERE'S AN
OPPORTUNITY RIGHT NOW, EVEN AS
THE REPUBLICAN PARTY FIGURES OUT
WHAT IT WANTS TO BE WHEN IT
GROWS UP, FOR AMERICANS OF BOTH
PARENTS TO LEARN HOW TO TALK TO
EACH OTHER.
>> Brown: STEVEN HAYWARD, LAST
WORLD, BRIEFLY.
>> WHEN I HEAR ERIC'S IDEALISM
IN A STUDENT I ALWAYS APPLAUD IT
AND IT.
AND TRY TO NURTURE IT.
I'M REMINDED OF SOMETHING JAMES
MADISON WROTE IN THE FEDERALIST
PAPERS, HE SAID SOMETIMES
DELIBERATATIVE WISDOM WILL BE
CONSPICUOUSLY ABSENT WHEN MOST
NEED.
I THINK IF YOU PLOPPED JAMES
MADISON DOWN TODAY HE WOULD SAY
I RECOGNIZE THIS.
THIS IS HOW I THOUGHT THINGS
WOULD GO.
>> Ifill: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY:
16 DAYS AFTER IT SHUT DOWN, THE
U.S. GOVERNMENT GOT BACK IN GEAR
AFTER CONGRESS REACHED A LAST-
MINUTE BUDGET DEAL.
PRESIDENT OBAMA URGED LAWMAKERS
TO FIND A WAY TO COOPERATE AND
PURSUE COMPROMISES.
AND A WAVE OF SUICIDE BOMBINGS
IN IRAQ KILLED MORE THAN 60
PEOPLE.
>> Woodruff: ONLINE, HOW A
CLASSIC AMERICAN CHILDREN'S BOOK
SERIES WAS SHAPED BY LIBERTARIAN
VALUES.
GUEST WRITER CHRISTINE WOODSIDE
EXPLORES THE HISTORY AND SELF-
SUFFICIENT IDEOLOGY BEHIND LAURA
INGALLS WILDER'S "LITTLE HOUSE"
BOOKS.
FIND THAT ON MAKING SENSE.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR
WEBSITE newshour.pbs.org.
>> Ifill: AND THAT'S THE
"NEWSHOUR" FOR TONIGHT.
I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING WITH MARK
SHIELDS AND DAVID BROOKS